Aquaman, American comic strip superhero, defender of the underwater kingdom of Atlantis, and sometime member of the superhero consortium Justice League of America. Aquaman made his debut in 1941 in the anthology series More Fun Comics and since that time has appeared in numerous DC Comics magazines.
Although Aquaman’s origin and even identity have been revised several times over the decades, in most iterations he possesses superhuman strength, the ability to breathe underwater, and the capacity to communicate telepathically with creatures of the sea, among other powers. He has curly blond hair and usually wears skintight clothing that includes a scaly orange shirt and green pants and gloves. For most of his career, he has been the monarch of Atlantis. The best-known version of Aquaman, developed in the “Silver Age” of comic books in the 1950s and ’60s, is the son of a lighthouse keeper and an Atlantean outcast. In 1964 he became one of the first superheroes to get married when he wed the undersea queen Mera. His nemeses include the supervillain Black Manta, who murdered one of Aquaman’s sons, and Ocean Master, who is also Aquaman’s half-brother Orm.

In the Silver Age, artist Ramona Fradon helped define Aquaman’s iconic appearance. In the later “Modern Age” of comics (mid-1980s to the present), writers such as Peter David, Keith Giffen, Kurt Busiek, and Kelly Sue DeConnick adapted and redefined Aquaman for new generations of readers.

Aquaman starred in animated television shows in 1967 and ’68 and in numerous animated versions of Super Friends starting in 1973. He also appeared as a character in the live-action television drama Smallville (2001) and as the featured character in the made-for-TV movie Aquaman (2006). Jason Momoa portrayed Aquaman in Justice League (2017), the character’s feature film debut. Momoa reprised the role for Aquaman (2018), a film that met generally positive reviews and, with more than $1.1 billion in earnings globally, nearly doubled Justice League’s anemic box office performance.
    
By The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica • Edit History
Key People: Neil Gaiman Jack Kirby Stan Lee Frank Miller Alan Moore
Related Topics: drawing comic strip superhero supervillain book
comic book, bound collection of comic strips, usually in chronological sequence, typically telling a single story or a series of different stories.

See an exhibition of comics from various countries curated by librarian Liladhar Pendse at UC Berkeley's Doe Library
See an exhibition of comics from various countries curated by librarian Liladhar Pendse at UC Berkeley's Doe Library
Visit the 2016-17 exhibition "Beyond Tintin and Superman: The Diversity of Global Comics," curated by librarian Liladhar Pendse at UC Berkeley's Doe Library.
Displayed by permission of The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. (A Britannica Publishing Partner)
See all videos for this article
The first true comic books were marketed in 1933 as giveaway advertising premiums. By 1935 reprints of newspaper strips and books with original stories were selling in large quantities. During World War II comics dealing with war and crime found many readers among soldiers stationed abroad, and in the 1950s comic books were blamed for juvenile delinquency. Though the industry responded with self-censorship, some adventure strips continued to be criticized. In the 1960s comic books satirizing the cultural underworld became popular, especially among college students. By the turn of the 21st century, Japanese comic books (manga), with their great variation in content and effect, had achieved worldwide popularity, and comic “’zines” represented a thriving subculture. Comic books are often used to deal with serious subjects. See also graphic novel.