Batman, American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics by writer Bill Finger and artist Bob Kane. Batman debuted in May 1939 in Detective Comics no. 27 and has since appeared in numerous comic books, comic strips, and graphic novels; on television in a camp live-action series and a critically acclaimed animated program; in electronic games; and in brooding, atmospheric films.

The origin of Batman, which was not revealed to readers until the character’s seventh comic book appearance, is now a familiar tale. As prosperous physician Thomas Wayne, his wife, Martha, and their young son, Bruce, exited a Gotham City movie house after a nighttime showing of The Mark of Zorro, they were robbed by a thief brandishing a pistol. Dr. Wayne attempted to protect his wife, but the panicky gunman murdered the adult Waynes as their horrified son watched. The grief-stricken boy dedicated his existence to avenging his parents’ murders by “spending the rest of my life warring on all criminals.” After years of training his mind and body to perfection—Bruce, having inherited his father’s millions—mulled over a crime-fighting disguise that would terrorize lawbreakers. A bat flapping through an open window was deemed an omen, and the original tale’s end caption heralded, “And thus is born this weird avenger of the dark...this avenger of evil. The Batman.”

Batman was an immediate sensation. In his earliest adventures (he was alternately called “Bat-Man” until the hyphen was dropped for consistency), Batman was quite brutal: he tossed a thug off a rooftop and executed a vampire by shooting him with a silver bullet. As Batman’s acclaim swelled, the character’s publisher recoiled, fearful that the sinister elements in the comic book would be emulated by its young audience. DC eliminated Batman’s use of firearms and extreme force: never again would Batman take a life.


Just under a year after the hero’s debut, DC softened him even more by introducing a young sidekick. Dick Grayson, a circus aerialist, observed the mob-ordered murder of his parents and became the ward of a sympathetic Wayne, who trained the lad to become Robin, the Boy Wonder. Exuberant and wisecracking, Robin had a profound influence on the brooding Batman. The former “weird avenger” stepped smoothly into the role of father figure.

The success of Batman’s appearances in Detective Comics led to an eponymous spin-off title that debuted in the spring of 1940. Ghost artists such as Jerry Robinson and Sheldon Moldoff illustrated the additional material, but, due to the terms of his contract with DC, Kane would receive the credit for such work. Finger, who was responsible for some of the most-recognizable elements of the Batman mythos, would not be acknowledged as a cocreator of the character for more than 75 years. Batman no. 1 introduced two villains who would become integral components of the character’s history: the sneering clown prince of crime, the Joker, and the sultry princess of plunder, the Catwoman (although she was called “the Cat” during her initial appearance). Batman and Robin were soon challenged by a growing contingent of odd antagonists: the Scarecrow, Penguin, and Riddler were just some of the rogues who repeatedly took on the “Dynamic Duo.”

Batman and Robin’s synchronized acrobatics and deductive mastery dazzled readers, as did their arsenal: they each sported utility belts containing the tools of their trade, including Batarangs (bat-winged boomerangs), Batropes (for climbing and swinging), and an assortment of other devices. For transportation, the Dynamic Duo used a variety of bat-themed vehicles warehoused in the secret Batcave beneath the heroes’ grand home, Wayne Manor. By 1942 Gotham City Police Commissioner James Gordon—in a reversal from the early days of the comic, when he had ordered his officers to fire upon Batman—was summoning the hero into action by illuminating the nighttime skies of Gotham City with the Bat-Signal.

The Dynamic Duo’s burgeoning popularity could not be contained in two magazines alone. They soon appeared in DC’s World’s Best (later World’s Finest) Comics and in 1943 swung into their own newspaper strip. In addition to their comics appearances, they segued into movie theatres in two serials, Batman (1943) and The New Adventures of Batman and Robin (1949), and guest-starred on several episodes of the radio program The Adventures of Superman in the mid-1940s.

Superhero comics declined in popularity after World War II, and Batman was one of three DC Comics characters to maintain his own series, the others being Superman and Wonder Woman. Despite Batman’s resiliency (and the emergence of artist Dick Sprang, whose interpretation of the Joker remains one of the classic renditions of the character), the 1950s were unkind to the cowled crime fighter and his sidekick. The challenge came not from a costumed nemesis, however, as the biggest threat facing Batman—indeed, all comics—was psychiatrist Frederic Wertham. In his polemic against the industry, Seduction of the Innocent (1954), Wertham charged that comics morally corrupt their impressionable young readers, impeaching Batman and Robin in particular for supposedly flaunting a gay lifestyle. Wertham wrote, “They live in sumptuous quarters, with beautiful flowers in large vases, and have a butler. It is like a wish dream of two homosexuals living together.” DC Comics responded by building a “Batman Family” around the Caped Crusader, introducing Batwoman, Ace the Bat-Hound, Batgirl, and even the magical imp Bat-Mite. Batman’s ghoulish adversaries were either neutered or discarded from the series. For years DC produced a kinder, gentler Batman, and readers responded by sending Batman and Detective Comics to the brink of cancellation.


Editor Julius Schwartz, who had resuscitated other DC superheroes, was tasked with revitalizing the ailing franchise in 1964. He commissioned artist Carmine Infantino, whose distinctive work on the Flash had helped usher in the Silver Age, to update the appearance of the hero. Infantino’s “New Look” added a yellow oval to Batman’s chest insignia, and his sharp, stylish penciling marked such a break with the past that Infantino was not forced to share credit with Kane. With the exception of Robin, Schwartz and writer John Broome evicted the codependent Batman Family. Detective mysteries became the norm, and Batman’s rogues’ gallery reappeared.

On January 12, 1966, ABC premiered a live-action Batman television series starring Adam West and Burt Ward. Batman bubbled with flashy costumes and sets (at a time when colour television was relatively new), Pop art sound-effect graphics, and a rotating roster of scenery-chewing villains. Cesar Romero (as the Joker), Burgess Meredith (the Penguin), Frank Gorshin (the Riddler), Vincent Price (Egghead), Milton Berle (Louie the Lilac), Joan Collins (the Siren), and Eartha Kitt (Catwoman, a role that was shared with Julie Newmar) were among the celebrities who made appearances as Batman’s foes. The show was an immediate hit, spawning an unprecedented wave of Bat-merchandise. The Batman newspaper strip resumed, and a theatrical movie was churned out for the summer of 1966. Late in the series, Yvonne Craig joined the cast as Batgirl. The entire superhero genre benefited from the show’s success, but declining ratings led to its cancellation after just three seasons.

The increased comic book sales DC enjoyed as a result of the television show quickly deflated once it left the air. This slump was overcome through the efforts of writers such as Denny O’Neil, Steve Englehart, and Len Wein and dynamic artists including Neal Adams, Dick Giordano, and Marshall Rogers. Gone were the camp trappings of comics’ Silver Age and the television show, as these comics creators produced gothic, atmospheric masterpieces that rehabilitated the character. In the 1980s Batman explored still grimmer themes, a trend that reached its apex with Batman: The Dark Knight Returns (1986), a four-issue miniseries by writer and artist Frank Miller that has come to be regarded as one of the first American graphic novels. Set in the near future, The Dark Knight portrayed an aging Bruce Wayne crawling out of retirement to restore order to a chaotic Gotham City. Miller’s gritty take on Batman established a template for other writers and artists to follow.


Director Tim Burton brought Batman (1989) to the silver screen, and Michael Keaton, a quirky actor slight of build and best known for comedy roles, was chosen to play the title character. Although the casting decision surprised many, the film was a massive success, spawning a wave of Bat-merchandise the likes of which had not been seen since 1966. In 1992 Burton and Keaton were back in theatres with Batman Returns, and the noirish Batman: The Animated Series (1992–95) debuted on television that fall. While subsequent films in the Batman franchise suffered declining quality and a rotating cast of lead actors, Batman: The Animated Series set a new standard for storytelling in the Batman universe. The series—which was marked by the mature tone of its plotlines, its distinctive colour palette and Art Deco visuals, and the outstanding calibre of its voice actors—reimagined villains such as Mr. Freeze and the Riddler, and it introduced fan-favourite character Harley Quinn as the Joker’s sidekick. The show earned four Emmy Awards and exerted a profound influence on later depictions of Gotham City and its inhabitants.

During this period, writer Jeph Loeb and artist Tim Sale collaborated on a number of popular comic sagas set during Batman’s early career, including Batman: The Long Halloween (1996–97), and Frank Miller wrote and drew The Dark Knight Strikes Again (2001), a sequel to his Batman: The Dark Night Returns. Starting in 2006, Grant Morrison and Paul Dini (the writer responsible for many of the most-memorable episodes of The Animated Series) reinvigorated the various Batman comic books with a series of high-concept story lines. One of Morrison’s most-enduring contributions to the Batman franchise was the creation of Damian Wayne, the son of Bruce Wayne and Talia al Ghul. The spoiled but gifted Damian assumed the mantle of Robin and acted as an antiheroic foil to both Batman and the previous Robins. Damian’s heroic death was one of the key moments in Morrison’s seven-year run on various Batman titles, but the character was eventually resurrected. When DC rebooted its entire comics line in 2016, Damian joined Superboy in the series Super Sons.

Director Christopher Nolan successfully relaunched the Batman film franchise with Batman Begins in 2005. With Christian Bale in the lead role and drawing on Frank Miller’s Batman: Year One (1987), Batman Begins retold the saga of Batman’s origin, showing his training and his early days as a costumed crime fighter. The 2008 sequel, The Dark Knight, was an even bigger commercial and critical success. The standout performance in the film was the late Heath Ledger’s extraordinary portrayal of the Joker, for which he won a posthumous Academy Award as best supporting actor. Nolan concluded his trilogy of Batman movies with The Dark Knight Rises (2012). Ben Affleck donned the cowl in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), a joyless portrayal of DC’s two most-recognizable heroes. In spite of harsh reviews from both critics and many fans, the film earned more than $800 million globally. The LEGO Batman Movie (2017), a spirited comedic romp told with computer-generated LEGO bricks, was much more warmly received. Affleck reprised his role as the Caped Crusader in Justice League (2017), the DC Extended Universe’s disappointing response to Marvel’s hugely successful Avengers franchise.